Hello there.
In this video, we're going to look in more detail at the C++ thread class.
One thing we can do with threads is to pause them.
We can say "do not execute any instructions for a
certain amount of time".
We can - if you like - tell them to go to sleep.
To do that, we call a function std colon colon this underscore thread
Colon colon sleep
Underscore for
And to tell the thread how long we want it to go to sleep for, we give it an argument of type
std colon colon
chrono, colon colon duration.
(I think the person who wrote this must have been paid by the keystroke!)
But anyway, this will specify the amount of time the thread is going to pause for.
If you're using C++11, the syntax is rather clumsy.
You have to put chrono colon colon, then the unit of time and then the number of units.
So that would be 50 milliseconds.
In C++ 14, they added some literals to the library, some for chrono, some for string and some for
units. The ones for chrono are in the std::chrono::literals namespace, but
that's actually inline inside the chrono namespace.
So you can just put std::literals and you'll pick them up.
Then you can say sleep for "50ms". If you want microseconds,
That's "us".
I think you'll agree that looks a lot better than that.
One very useful side effect of this is that it works with single threaded programs as well.
You still have to #include thread, but you do not need any actual threads in the program.
Apart from the main thread, of course.
So that solves quite a long running program in C++, where it's quite often that you want your program
to be able to stop for a second or two before doing something.
But there was not any standard way to do that.
You would have to go into Windows or the Linux operating system and do something that was system specific.
So that made it quite hard to teach people how to do that.
So now there's a standard way.
Each individual thread object has an identifier.
This is of type std::thread::id.
It is actually a class, but it behaves like a number.
The values that it has are not actually important to us.
They are just used internally in the library.
They are guaranteed to be unique in that, if you have several threads running at the same time, they will
all have different ID's.
And if you have two thread objects which have identical...
And if you have two threads which have the same identifier, then they are the same object.
In other words, you've got two references.
However,
ID's can be reused. If a thread terminates and then a new thread starts up, the new thread could be given
the ID that the old thread had.
So they are not completely unique in that sense. If you have an ID, it does not necessarily tell you
which thread you have.
Which is a bit unfortunate because they have ordering. So you can use them as keys and that would allow
you to store objects in associative  containers. So you could have a map or a set of threads.
Unfortunately, because the ID's can be reused, there is no way to guarantee that the ID that you have
now corresponds to the thread that you had when you put the ID into the container.
Which is all a bit pointless, but don't ask me, I didn't design the language! Anyway to get the ID
of the current thread, we do a std colon colon this underscore thread colon colon get underscore
id.
And if you have an object, you can call a member function, get underscore id, and that will return
the identifier as well.
So as we said earlier, the threads provided by the C++ Standard Library are really just a wrapper around
the operating system
one. It is actually possible to gain access to the underlying operating system.
Usually the functions which the operating system provides use some kind of "handle", which is data about
the thread.
The C++ class has a native underscore handle member function which will allow you to retrieve that
handle. So you can get the handle and then work directly with the underlying operating system if you
want to.
So you get access to the Windows Base API, pthreads, the Linux kernel threads and so on.
Why would you want to do that?
Well, there are some extra functions which operating systems provide which haven't been added to the
C++ thread.
So, for example, you can change the priority of a thread.
You can say that you want one thread to have a higher priority than the others, or some threads to have lower
priority, depending on how important they are.
And there is also something called threat affinity.
You can say, I want this thread to run on a particular core.
That's very important in high-performance computing with low latency. If you have a thread which is
being switched from one core to another or being task switched out of context, then loaded up again.
That's a big overhead that can really kill the performance. In a situation where performance is absolutely
critical,
that's just too much overhead.
So you can use this to pin a particular threat onto a core.
For example, I think there are some stockbrokers who have systems where each core on a computer represents
a different stock symbol.
So they have one dedicated processor core for each stock symbol.
That's the kind of thing you can do.
We discussed this before. The thread class has ownership of the underlying thread in the same way
that unique_ptr has ownership of the underlying data that it is pointing to. We can only have one thread
object for an execution thread at a time.
And as with unique pointers, we cannot copy the thread objects because you cannot have two threads trying
to manage the same system thread.
But it is possible to move a thread object.
This means that the thread object which is moved from, surrenders ownership of the system thread and
the object that it is moved into acquires ownership of the system thread.
So in effect, we have transferred the system thread from one owning object to another.
And we can use this for passing thread objects into functions. So we can have some function, which
takes a thread as argument.
So you can call this with a temporary object.
This has to be an rvalue reference, obviously, otherwise it can't get moved.
If we give it an lvalue, then this will try to call the copy constructor, which is deleted, and
you'll get a compiler error. So we could use a temporary object as the argument, or else we could get
an lvalue object and then use move on it.
std::move()
So when we do that, the thread object here, initially this owns a system thread, which is going
to start running this func function when it starts up. When we move this thread object into the function
argument, the local variable in the function then takes ownership of that system thread.
And then when the system thread starts, is going to run, it will be under the control of this variable in this
function.
The object here has had the system thread moved out from it, and it no longer has ownership
of it.
In particular, when we get to call join(), we need to call join() as otherwise the - well, you know
the problem - the main will terminate before the thread finishes.
join() needs to be called by the owner of the thread, and that's going to be the local variable in this
function here.
We cannot call join() on this object because it does not own the underlying thread anymore.
And we can also return thread objects from functions, so we have a function which returns a thread.
And again, we can either return a temporary object or else we can return a local variable. We do not
put this inside a call to std::move() because the compiler will do that automatically if it is possible.
So, again, this
underlying threat is initially owned by code in this function, then it gets moved into the return
value and then whoever calls this will then own the underlying threat and they'll have the responsibility
for joining it.
And finally, exceptions. How do exceptions work when you have all these different threads?
Each of the underlying threads has its own personal call stack.
So all the data inside the thread is private.
It is only the shared data which is accessible between threads.
When an exception is thrown in a single threaded program, the stack is unwound, so the destructors
for all the objects in the current scope are called. The program will look for a suitable handler.
If it cannot find one, it will jump up to the caller, it will do the same there. And it will keep on going until
it finds a suitable handler.
If it doesn't find one, it will call std::terminate() and by default, that will finish the program.
When an exception is thrown inside a thread, we get the same stack unwinding process.
The difference is it does not go all the way to main().
It goes all the way to the start of the thread's stack.
So the destructors in the local scope are called. It will look for a handler, it will move up.
If that is the top of the thread's stack, it will call terminate.
Even if you have a suitable handler in the main thread, that will not get called because it is not in the
exception's call stack.
So each underlying thread has its own stack.
The exception is... If you like, it cannot propagate out of that stack.
It has to be handled inside.
that.
The only way to handle an exception is to catch it inside the thread where it occurs, and that is completely
normal.
Exactly the same as anywhere else. You have a try and catch
block. You can rethrow, if you like. All the usual stuff.
OK, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time.